.TH pyradio-client 1 "June 2024" pyradio

.SH Name
.PP
pyradio-client \- a Remote Control Client for PyRadio

.SH \fBRemote\ Control\ Client
.P
\f[B]PyRadio\f[R] comes with a client to be used in conjunction with the
\f[B]Remote Control Server\f[R] provided by the program, using the
server\[cq]s text command set.
.PP
The \f[B]client\f[R] is created with maximum ease in mind; the user does
not even have to provide the IP and PORT.
.SH Command line parameters
The following is the output of the \[lq]\f[B]pyradio-client -h\f[R]\[rq]
command:
.P
\fIUsage: \fBpyradio-client\fI [\fB-h\fI] [\fB--address\fI] [\fB-s\fI SERVER_AND_PORT] [\fB-r\fI]
                      [\fB-t\fI TIMEOUT] [command]

PyRadio Remote Control Client

General options:
  \fB-h\fI, \fB--help\fI            Show this help message and exit
  \fB--address\fI             List available servers

Server Parameters:
  \fB-s\fI SERVER_AND_PORT, \fB--server_and_port\fI SERVER_AND_PORT
                        Set the servers\[aq]s IP and PORT (format: IP:PORT)
  \fB-r\fI, \fB--reverse-detection\fI
                        Reverse server detection (when no server IP and PORT
                        specified); detect headless server last, instead of
                        headless server first
  \fB-t\fI TIMEOUT, \fB--timeout\fI TIMEOUT
                        Set the timeout (default = 1.0)
  command               The command to send to the server
.EE
.SH How it works
The client will auto-detect the \f[B]PyRadio Servers\f[R] running on the
system, when the \[lq]\f[I]-s\f[R]\[rq] command line parameter is not
used.
.PP
The auto-detection functionality is based on parsing the
\[lq]\f[I]server files\f[R]\[rq] (residing in the STATE directory).
.PP
If both a \f[B]headless\f[R] and a \f[B]normal\f[R] instance of
\f[B]PyRadio\f[R] are detected, the \f[B]headless\f[R] server will be
used to send the requested command, unless the \[lq]\f[I]-r\f[R]\[rq]
(\[lq]\f[I]\[en]reverse-detection\f[R]\[rq]) command line parameter is
used.
.IP \fBNote:
A \f[B]normal\f[R] server is a server started by a \f[B]PyRadio\f[R]
instance which is executed on a real terminal, without the
\[lq]\f[I]\[en]\[en]headless\f[R]\[rq] command line parameter.
.PP
A list of available commands will be displayed when no command has been
specified.
.PP
A list of detected servers (and their address) can be obtained
using the command:
.IP
.EX
\fI$ pyradio-client --addr

PyRadio Remote Control Server
  Headless server: 127.0.0.1:11111
  Server: 127.0.0.1:9998
.EE
.PP
Then, the \f[B]address\f[R] reported can be used to contact a specific
server:
.IP
.EX
\fIpyradio-client -s 127.0.0.1:9998 i
.EE
.PP
The previous command will get the info page of the \f[B]normal\f[R]
instance of a server.

.SH See also

    pyradio_server(1)

    pyradio(1)
